Readme.md, before:

# d3.Timeslider

d3.Timeslider is a time slider based on the [D3.js](http://d3js.org) javascript
library. It is written in [CoffeeScript](http://coffeescript.org) and
[Less](http://lesscss.org)

The software is licensed under a MIT compatible license, for more information see
[License](License).

For a list of recent changes, please see the [Changelog](Changelog).

## Usage

Include the JavaScript and CSS files (and [D3.js](http://d3js.org/) as
D3.Timeslider depends on it) and then instantiate a new slider like in the
following snippet.

You can download the latest version of D3 directly from
[d3js.org/d3.v3.zip](http://d3js.org/d3.v3.zip)

If you want to display datasets loaded from an EOWCS server, you also need
to include [libcoverage.js](https://github.com/EOX-A/libcoverage.js).

## Options

### `domain` - ` { start: <Date>, end: <Date> }`

The maximum domain of the timeslider. When `constrain` is set, it is not
possible to zoom/pan outside of this domain.

### `brush` - ` { start: <Date>, end: <Date> }`

The initial selection.

### `display` - ` { start: <Date>, end: <Date> }`

The initially displayed interval. This defaults to the `domain`.

### `ticksize` - `Number`

The height of the displayed ranges or the diameter of the displayed dots.

### `debounce` - `Number`

The time (in milliseconds) to wait between accessing the sources `fetch`
function.

### `brushTooltip` - `boolean`

Whether or not to display the brush tooltips. Defaults to `false`.

### `tooltipFormatter` - `function`

This function is invoked when a tooltip is to be displayed for a record. It is
passed the record, an `Array` in the following form: `start`, `end`, and
`params`. By default, a function is used that displays either the `id` or `name`
property (in that order).

When the function returns a falsy value, then no tooltip is displayed.

### `constrain` - `boolean`

When set, the viewable interval is constrained to the `domain`.

### `selectionLimit` - `Number`

When set, this limits the maximum interval in seconds allowed to brush.

### `recordFilter` - `function`

A function to be called for each record with the following parameters: `record`
(an array: `start`, `end`, and `params`) and the `dataset`. When the function
returns a truthy value, the record is displayed whole, and hollow otherwise.

### `datasets` - `[ {...}, ]`

An array of dataset definitions (objects) with the following layout

 - `id`: The ID of the dataset. This is used in events and callbacks
 - `color`: The color to display the dataset. Anything possible for CSS works here
 - `lineplot`: Whether this dataset will be displayed as a line
 - `histogram`: Whether this dataset will be displayed in a quantized manner
 - `sourceParams`: Anything you want to pass to the source function.
 - `records`: The records for this dataset. When the records are set this way,
   the dataset is static, and does not change.
 - `source`: Either a function or an object with a `fetch` method. This
   function/method is passed the following arguments: `start`, `end`,
   `sourceParams` and a `callback`. The callback is expected to be called with
   an array of either:
     - single `Dates`
     - an `Array` of
       - one `Date` and parameters (or a single value for `lineplots`)
       - two `Date`s
       - two `Date`s and parameters

   The parameters are used for the `recordFilter` and to display the tooltip on
   the mouseover: either the `id` or `name` properties are used when available.


## Public API

### `hide` / `show`

Hide/show the timeslider (using the CSS `display` property).

### `domain` - `start`, `end`

Sets the domain to the new start/end. This method redraws the timeslider.

### `select` - `start`, `end`

Sets the selection of the timeslider.

### `center` - `start`, `end`

Immediatly show the given interval. Redraws.

### `zoom` - `start`, `end`

Zoom to the given interval over a small amount of time. Redraws in the transition.

### `addDataset` - `definition`

Adds a new dataset by definition. See the initial options for the layout. This
starts the reloading of the dataset.

### `removeDataset` - `id`

Remove a dataset by its ID. Redraws.

### `hasDataset` - `id`

Returns `true` when the dataset with the `id` exists.

### `reset`

Reset the view to the `domain` using `zoom`.

### `setBrushTooltip` - `boolean`

Enable/disable the brush tooltip.

### `setBrushTooltipOffset`

Set the pixel offsets of the brush tooltips.

### `setRecordFilter` - `function`

Set the `recordFilter`. See the options for details. Redraws.

### `setTooltipFormatter` - `function`

Sets the tooltip formatting function.

## Events raised

The timeslider raises several custom events. All arguments are stored in the
events `detail` property.

### `selectionChanged`

This event is emitted when the user has finished brushing a new selection. The
details are:

  - `start`: the new start time of the selection
  - `end`: the new end time of the selection

### `recordMouseover` / `recordMouseout` / `recordClicked`

These events are raised when a record is hovered, stopped hovering or clicked.
The details always include:

  - `dataset`: the dataset ID
  - `start`: the start time of the record
  - `end`: the end time of the record
  - `params`: optional record parameters when available

### `binMouseover` / `binMouseout` / `binClicked`

These events are raised when a bin of a histogram dataset is hovered, stopped
hovering or clicked. The details always include:

  - `dataset`: the dataset ID
  - `start`: the start time of the histogram bin
  - `end`: the end time of the histogram bin
  - `bin`: the array of records in that bin

## Example
An example on how to use it is provided below.

```html
<!-- libcoverage.js-->
<script src="dependencies/libcoverage.js/libcoverage.min.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

<!-- TimeSlider -->
<script src="build/d3.timeslider.js"></script>
<script src="build/d3.timeslider.plugins.js"></script>
<link href="build/d3.timeslider.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" media="all" />
<script>
  window.addEventListener('load', function() {
    // Initialize the TimeSlider
    slider = new TimeSlider(document.getElementById('d3_timeslider'), {
      debounce: 50,
      domain: {
        start: new Date("2012-01-01T00:00:00Z"),
        end: new Date("2013-01-01T00:00:00Z"),
      },
      brush: {
        start: new Date("2012-01-05T00:00:00Z"),
        end: new Date("2012-01-10T00:00:00Z")
      },
      datasets: [
        {
          id: 'img2012',
          color: 'red',
          data: function(start, end, callback) {
            return callback('img2012', [
              [ new Date("2012-01-01T12:00:00Z"), new Date("2012-01-01T16:00:00Z") ],
              [ new Date("2012-01-02T12:00:00Z"), new Date("2012-01-02T16:00:00Z") ],
              new Date("2012-01-04T00:00:00Z"),
              new Date("2012-01-05T00:00:00Z"),
              [ new Date("2012-01-06T12:00:00Z"), new Date("2012-01-26T16:00:00Z") ],
            ]);
          }
        }
      ]
    });

    // Register a callback for changing the selected time period
    document.getElementById('d3_timeslider').addEventListener('selectionChanged', function(e){
      console.log("Custom event handler on the time slider");
      console.log(e.detail);
    });

    // Change the TimeSlider domain, or the selected interval, then reset the
    // TimeSlider to it's initial state
    slider.domain(new Date("2011-01-01T00:00:00Z"),  new Date("2013-01-01T00:00:00Z"));
    slider.select(new Date("2011-02-01T00:00:00Z"),  new Date("2013-02-08T00:00:00Z"))
    slider.reset();

    // Add a new dataset and remove another one
    slider.addDataset({
      id: 'fsc',
      color: 'green'
      data: new TimeSlider.Plugin.EOWCS({ url: 'http://neso.cryoland.enveo.at/cryoland/ows', eoid: 'daily_FSC_PanEuropean_Optical', dataset: 'fsc' })
    });
    slider.addDataset({
      id: 'asar',
      color: 'purple',
      data: new TimeSlider.Plugin.WMS({ url: 'http://data.eox.at/instance01/ows', eoid: 'ASAR_IMM_L1_view', dataset: 'asar' })
    })
    slider.removeDataset('img2012');
)
  }, false);
</script>
```

## Development

Install development dependencies, and start grunt via the following two commands.

```sh
npm install
grunt watch
```

You can then open the [preview](preview.html) page and any changes to the
CoffeeScript and Less files will be automatically compiled and reloaded in the
browser.

To lint the CoffeeScript source run the following command.

```sh
grunt lint
```

Commit message:

Using a function to dispatch all events. Introducing an event that is fired when the display interval is changed.

Readme.md, after:

# d3.Timeslider

d3.Timeslider is a time slider based on the [D3.js](http://d3js.org) javascript
library. It is written in [CoffeeScript](http://coffeescript.org) and
[Less](http://lesscss.org)

The software is licensed under a MIT compatible license, for more information see
[License](License).

For a list of recent changes, please see the [Changelog](Changelog).

## Usage

Include the JavaScript and CSS files (and [D3.js](http://d3js.org/) as
D3.Timeslider depends on it) and then instantiate a new slider like in the
following snippet.

You can download the latest version of D3 directly from
[d3js.org/d3.v3.zip](http://d3js.org/d3.v3.zip)

If you want to display datasets loaded from an EOWCS server, you also need
to include [libcoverage.js](https://github.com/EOX-A/libcoverage.js).

## Options

### `domain` - ` { start: <Date>, end: <Date> }`

The maximum domain of the timeslider. When `constrain` is set, it is not
possible to zoom/pan outside of this domain.

### `brush` - ` { start: <Date>, end: <Date> }`

The initial selection.

### `display` - ` { start: <Date>, end: <Date> }`

The initially displayed interval. This defaults to the `domain`.

### `ticksize` - `Number`

The height of the displayed ranges or the diameter of the displayed dots.

### `debounce` - `Number`

The time (in milliseconds) to wait between accessing the sources `fetch`
function.

### `brushTooltip` - `boolean`

Whether or not to display the brush tooltips. Defaults to `false`.

### `tooltipFormatter` - `function`

This function is invoked when a tooltip is to be displayed for a record. It is
passed the record, an `Array` in the following form: `start`, `end`, and
`params`. By default, a function is used that displays either the `id` or `name`
property (in that order).

When the function returns a falsy value, then no tooltip is displayed.

### `constrain` - `boolean`

When set, the viewable interval is constrained to the `domain`.

### `selectionLimit` - `Number`

When set, this limits the maximum interval in seconds allowed to brush.

### `recordFilter` - `function`

A function to be called for each record with the following parameters: `record`
(an array: `start`, `end`, and `params`) and the `dataset`. When the function
returns a truthy value, the record is displayed whole, and hollow otherwise.

### `datasets` - `[ {...}, ]`

An array of dataset definitions (objects) with the following layout

 - `id`: The ID of the dataset. This is used in events and callbacks
 - `color`: The color to display the dataset. Anything possible for CSS works here
 - `lineplot`: Whether this dataset will be displayed as a line
 - `histogram`: Whether this dataset will be displayed in a quantized manner
 - `sourceParams`: Anything you want to pass to the source function.
 - `records`: The records for this dataset. When the records are set this way,
   the dataset is static, and does not change.
 - `source`: Either a function or an object with a `fetch` method. This
   function/method is passed the following arguments: `start`, `end`,
   `sourceParams` and a `callback`. The callback is expected to be called with
   an array of either:
     - single `Dates`
     - an `Array` of
       - one `Date` and parameters (or a single value for `lineplots`)
       - two `Date`s
       - two `Date`s and parameters

   The parameters are used for the `recordFilter` and to display the tooltip on
   the mouseover: either the `id` or `name` properties are used when available.


## Public API

### `hide` / `show`

Hide/show the timeslider (using the CSS `display` property).

### `domain` - `start`, `end`

Sets the domain to the new start/end. This method redraws the timeslider.

### `select` - `start`, `end`

Sets the selection of the timeslider.

### `center` - `start`, `end`

Immediatly show the given interval. Redraws.

### `zoom` - `start`, `end`

Zoom to the given interval over a small amount of time. Redraws in the transition.

### `addDataset` - `definition`

Adds a new dataset by definition. See the initial options for the layout. This
starts the reloading of the dataset.

### `removeDataset` - `id`

Remove a dataset by its ID. Redraws.

### `hasDataset` - `id`

Returns `true` when the dataset with the `id` exists.

### `reset`

Reset the view to the `domain` using `zoom`.

### `setBrushTooltip` - `boolean`

Enable/disable the brush tooltip.

### `setBrushTooltipOffset`

Set the pixel offsets of the brush tooltips.

### `setRecordFilter` - `function`

Set the `recordFilter`. See the options for details. Redraws.

### `setTooltipFormatter` - `function`

Sets the tooltip formatting function.

## Events raised

The timeslider raises several custom events. All arguments are stored in the
events `detail` property.

### `selectionChanged`

This event is emitted when the user has finished brushing a new selection. The
details are:

  - `start`: the new start time of the selection
  - `end`: the new end time of the selection

### `displayChanged`

This event is emitted after zooming or panning the timeslider. The
details are:

  - `start`: the new start time of the viewable interval
  - `end`: the new end time of the viewable interval

### `recordMouseover` / `recordMouseout` / `recordClicked`

These events are raised when a record is hovered, stopped hovering or clicked.
The details always include:

  - `dataset`: the dataset ID
  - `start`: the start time of the record
  - `end`: the end time of the record
  - `params`: optional record parameters when available

### `binMouseover` / `binMouseout` / `binClicked`

These events are raised when a bin of a histogram dataset is hovered, stopped
hovering or clicked. The details always include:

  - `dataset`: the dataset ID
  - `start`: the start time of the histogram bin
  - `end`: the end time of the histogram bin
  - `bin`: the array of records in that bin

## Example
An example on how to use it is provided below.

```html
<!-- libcoverage.js-->
<script src="dependencies/libcoverage.js/libcoverage.min.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

<!-- TimeSlider -->
<script src="build/d3.timeslider.js"></script>
<script src="build/d3.timeslider.plugins.js"></script>
<link href="build/d3.timeslider.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" media="all" />
<script>
  window.addEventListener('load', function() {
    // Initialize the TimeSlider
    slider = new TimeSlider(document.getElementById('d3_timeslider'), {
      debounce: 50,
      domain: {
        start: new Date("2012-01-01T00:00:00Z"),
        end: new Date("2013-01-01T00:00:00Z"),
      },
      brush: {
        start: new Date("2012-01-05T00:00:00Z"),
        end: new Date("2012-01-10T00:00:00Z")
      },
      datasets: [
        {
          id: 'img2012',
          color: 'red',
          data: function(start, end, callback) {
            return callback('img2012', [
              [ new Date("2012-01-01T12:00:00Z"), new Date("2012-01-01T16:00:00Z") ],
              [ new Date("2012-01-02T12:00:00Z"), new Date("2012-01-02T16:00:00Z") ],
              new Date("2012-01-04T00:00:00Z"),
              new Date("2012-01-05T00:00:00Z"),
              [ new Date("2012-01-06T12:00:00Z"), new Date("2012-01-26T16:00:00Z") ],
            ]);
          }
        }
      ]
    });

    // Register a callback for changing the selected time period
    document.getElementById('d3_timeslider').addEventListener('selectionChanged', function(e){
      console.log("Custom event handler on the time slider");
      console.log(e.detail);
    });

    // Change the TimeSlider domain, or the selected interval, then reset the
    // TimeSlider to it's initial state
    slider.domain(new Date("2011-01-01T00:00:00Z"),  new Date("2013-01-01T00:00:00Z"));
    slider.select(new Date("2011-02-01T00:00:00Z"),  new Date("2013-02-08T00:00:00Z"))
    slider.reset();

    // Add a new dataset and remove another one
    slider.addDataset({
      id: 'fsc',
      color: 'green'
      data: new TimeSlider.Plugin.EOWCS({ url: 'http://neso.cryoland.enveo.at/cryoland/ows', eoid: 'daily_FSC_PanEuropean_Optical', dataset: 'fsc' })
    });
    slider.addDataset({
      id: 'asar',
      color: 'purple',
      data: new TimeSlider.Plugin.WMS({ url: 'http://data.eox.at/instance01/ows', eoid: 'ASAR_IMM_L1_view', dataset: 'asar' })
    })
    slider.removeDataset('img2012');
)
  }, false);
</script>
```

## Development

Install development dependencies, and start grunt via the following two commands.

```sh
npm install
grunt watch
```

You can then open the [preview](preview.html) page and any changes to the
CoffeeScript and Less files will be automatically compiled and reloaded in the
browser.

To lint the CoffeeScript source run the following command.

```sh
grunt lint
```
